[953] tedge watchdog (#1026)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/howto-guides/021_enable_tedge_watchdog_using_systemd.md

# How to enable the watchdog feature using systemd in thin-edge.io

Enabling the `watchdog` feature for a `thin-edge.io` service (tedge_agent, tedge_mapper_c8y/az/collectd) using the `systemd` is a two step process.

> # Step 1: Enable the `watchdog` feature in the `systemd` service file

Author: fixed

For example to enable the `watchdog` feature for `tedge-mapper-c8y` service, update systemd service file as shown below.

Add `tedge_watchdog.service` in  `After` under `[Unit]` section.
Add `WatchdogSec=5` under `[Service]` section.

The sample service file after updating looks as below.

> ```toml

Author: fixed

[Unit]
Description=tedge-mapper-c8y converts Thin Edge JSON measurements to Cumulocity JSON format.
After=syslog.target network.target mosquitto.service `tedge_watchdog.service`

[Service]
User=tedge-mapper
ExecStart=/usr/bin/tedge_mapper c8y
Restart=on-failure
RestartPreventExitStatus=255
`WatchdogSec=5`
```

> >Note: The systemd service file usually present in `/lib/systemd/system/tedge-mapper-c8y.service`.

Author: fixed

# Step 2: Start the `tedge-watchdog` service

> Start the `watchdog` service as below.

Author: fixed

```shell
systemctl start tedge-watchdog.service
```

Now the `tedge-watchdog` service will be keep sending health check messages for every `WatchdogSec/2` seconds.
Once the response is received from the particular service, the `watchdog` service will send the notification
to the systemd on behalf of the service.

# Debugging
One can observe the message exchange between the `service` and the `watchdog` by subscribing to `tedge/health/#` and `tedge/health-check/#` topics.
For more info check [here](./020_monitor_tedge_health)

> >Note: If the watchdog service did not send the notification to the systemd within `WatchdogSec`, then the systemd will kill the existing service process and restarts it.

Author: fixed

# Watchdog feature using `systemd` in `thin-edge.io`

## Introduction

> `Watchdog` feature is used to check the health of a service/process by constantly exchanging
> the message between the watchdog process and the service/process that is being monitored.
> When the process does not update its health status within a specified `time` period, then the watchdog process will
> restart the service that is being monitored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The systemd watchdog feature enables systemd to detect when a service is unhealthy or unresponsive and attempt to fix it by restarting that service.
To detect if a service is healthy or not, systemd relies on periodic health notifications from that service at regular intervals.
If the service fails to send that notification within a time threshold, then systemd will assume that service to be unhealthy and restart it.
```

feature to check the health of these services as well. This document provides
information about how to use `systemd` for checking the health of the services.

## Enabling the `watchdog` feature in `systemd`

Enabling the `watchdog` feature in systemd for a `thin-edge.io` service (tedge_agent, tedge_mapper_c8y/az/collectd)
using the `systemd` is a two-step process.

### Step 1: Enable the `watchdog` feature in the `systemd` service file
For example to enable the `watchdog` feature for `tedge-mapper-c8y` service, update systemd service file as shown below.

Add `tedge_watchdog.service` in  `After` under `[Unit]` section.
Add `WatchdogSec=5` under `[Service]` section.

The sample service file after updating looks as below.

```shell
[Unit]
Description=tedge-mapper-c8y converts Thin Edge JSON measurements to Cumulocity JSON format.
After=syslog.target network.target mosquitto.service tedge_watchdog.service

[Service]
User=tedge-mapper
ExecStart=/usr/bin/tedge_mapper c8y
Restart=on-failure
RestartPreventExitStatus=255
WatchdogSec=5
```

> Note: The systemd service file usually present in `/lib/systemd/system/tedge-mapper-c8y.service`.

### Step 2: Start the `tedge-watchdog` service

> 

Reviewer: Better to add an intro of what the `tedge-watchdog` service is here, something like:
```suggestion

The `tedge-watchdog` service is responsible for periodically checking the health of all tedge services for which the watchdog feature is enabled, and send systemd watchdog notifications on their behalf to systemd.

```

Start the `watchdog` service as below.
```shell
systemctl start tedge-watchdog.service
```

> Now the `tedge-watchdog` service will be keep sending health check messages for every `WatchdogSec/2` seconds.
> Once the response is received from the particular service, the `watchdog` service will send the notification
> to the systemd on behalf of the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, the `tedge-watchdog` service will be keep sending health check messages to the monitored services  periodically within their configured `WatchdogSec` interval.
The health check request for a service is published to `tedge/health-check/<service-name>` topic and the health status response from that service is expected on `tedge/health/<service-name>` topic.
Once the health status response is received from a particular service, the `tedge-watchdog` service will send the watchdog notification on behalf of that service to systemd.
```
